Simple.
Welcome, Minister Seymour, Honorable Paula Bennett,
Mrs. McMurtrie, very good to have you here. We've got you in here for half an hour.
I'll leave it to you to make some short opening remarks, and then we'll go to
questions. Thank you.
Yes. Well, look, thank you to the chair and the committee for this opportunity to
share all the wonderful news about what has been achieved in
Pharmac and also Medsafe over the last year, and indeed,
the last two and a half years, where enormous progress has been made in
the functioning of the organizations and the service that's received by New
Zealanders. I think it's fair to say that two and a half years ago,
we inherited Pharmac in a poor state.
It did not have certainty of funding.
There was a war of words between the
chief executive of
Pharmac and various stakeholders who were
protesting outside the building.
There was very slow performance in
assessing medicines despite low volumes of
medicines being assessed. An enormous amount of
frustration
in the entire sector. Today, we have a new
chair, a new chief executive, a program of improvement
within the culture of Pharmac. We have seen eight
new medicines funded and 28 with widened access in the '25,
'26 year, following 31 new listings and
52 with widened access in the previous year.
Altogether, 360,000 patients
have benefited from this new access.
We've also set about new ways of thinking about funding Pharmac
as we transform the organization from economizing within a fixed
budget to becoming an advocate for a larger
pharmaceutical budget where savings can be made elsewhere.
And I'm happy to talk about that ongoing project.
In the case of Medsafe, we've roughly halved the time for
consents depending on their complexity, and we've introduced a new
initiative, being the rule of two, where if a
medicine is
approved or consented in the last four years in any of a
number of other jurisdictions, then it will be consented in New Zealand
within 30 days of application. This
is a major change that will bring medicines access,
frankly, to where it should've been for a long time, up with the rest of the world.
So those are just some of the things that have occurred.
I'm sure there'll be people that want to ask more specific questions.
Very happy to share more of the good news.
Thank you, Minister. Chloe Swarbrick, primary. And then Ashleigh.
Kia ora. I just wanted to ask about medical devices.
So I've got a few different questions just to try and actually explore what's going
on here.
Firstly, can you confirm whether Pharmac runs evergreen contracts on
medical devices?
Evergreen contracts?
Yeah.
What do you mean by that?
Effectively, contracts that auto-renew and are changed only by mutual
consent between Pharmac and the medical device company.
Well, if you want to ask about the specifics of contracts, I'll refer you to the
chief executive.
Okay.
We do have a number of contracts that have evergreen but checkpoints
for renewal.
And that helps us keep prices stable over time.
And we use a mix of some are and some aren't, but
we do have those. And we have those in pharmaceuticals as well on occasion, it
helps us
stabilize prices over the longer term.
Really keen to pick that point up. But just to further explore this evergreen
point. So when was the last competitive process run for medical
devices?
We just ran one right before Christmas on drug-eluting
stents.
Mm-hmm.
And
yeah.
Okay.
So I understand that, rather, is
Pharmac aware of any current contracted arrangements that are
offering hospitals a lower price in exchange for a written commitment to buy
less than 10% of their volume from competing suppliers?
I am not aware.
You're not aware of those?
No.
Okay. My understanding is that there have been some smaller players that have
written to you to that effect, so I can follow up with some further questions.
Are you aware of Christchurch New Zealand, the economic development arm of
Christchurch City Council, having run some
surveys of medical health tech companies
who have said at least half of them found it impossible to navigate the health
system procurement processes?
We're not aware of that correspondence.
Nonetheless, we frequently engage with people who are frustrated by
not having their product supported or feel that the procedures are more
bureaucratic than they'd need to be.
That's why we have, after 12 years of fighting
between Health New Zealand and Pharmac, put in place
a fair division of who procures which types
of devices. And as a result, the
two organizations are now able to streamline their processes.
But I'm not surprised that people would be frustrated with what they've experienced
over that period.
And I guess, Minister, to that earlier point of the confirmation that there are
evergreen contracts that exist for
medical devices, that kind of contradicts what I understand was your
letter that you wrote along with Simeon Brown to require that the procurement
pipeline is refreshed annually. Does it surprise you to hear that there are
evergreen contracts for medical devices?
Well, not really, because in any kind of arrangement, you have to decide how
much you're going to spend on the transactions, how much bureaucracy you
want versus how much you can save through that contestability.
So there's certainly a view that there should be
markets for everything and every arrangement at all
times should be up for reset.
Other times, there are people who say, "No, we reject that neoliberal
outlook. We would like to see a little bit more certainty over time, and you can be
more efficient and get more value for it."
Mm-hmm.
That's an ongoing debate amongst a variety of people.
I'm interested to see the side the member's taken.
So just further to explore particularly this point, though,
Pharmac, in correspondence that I've seen, more than happy to share.
Pharmac has said that it will only reprioritize procurement for medical
devices where savings exceed about a million dollars a year.
Is that an official Pharmac position?
Well, again, it's up to the chief executive to decide these sorts of
criteria.
Yeah, totally. Whoever's most appropriate to answer it. It's all good.
I think we're currently going through the transition of
separating the work between Pharmac and Health New Zealand.
And one of the big pieces of work there is to figure out a way to prioritize which
areas we want to spend the time jointly procuring and going through the procurement
processes. So,
we do look at large number of contracts and try to prioritize where
we think the most savings will be by doing a large
procurement process that is joint between us, and
we're relying on Health New Zealand now in the new model of trying
to prioritize together which ones we want to work on.
I guess further to that point in particular, I've seen correspondence, and I'm
interested as to whether it's come across your guys' desk, that in
one specific documented case, Pharmac has gone back to one of these
small medical device
suppliers or small businesses and said that a
saving that Pharmac had agreed would constitute about $300,000 a
year was too small to pursue. Is that something that concerns you
guys?
Well, not necessarily, because Pharmac, like any organization, has
limited time.
Mm-hmm.
A lot of contracts, and it has to decide which ones to do first.
I think if we were to discover that they had a choice of
pursuing a contract that would save a million dollars or pursuing a contract that
would save $300,000, obviously you'd want them to do both.
But if they had to choose, you'd want them to do the one that saved a million
dollars. So it wouldn't be surprising to hear something like that if you start to
think through the logic of what an organization like Pharmac is trying
to achieve. Nonetheless, as the chief executive has
indicated, we are in the process of a transition
after basically Simeon and Brown and I negotiating a peace
after a civil war between Pharmac and
Health New Zealand that went on for a dozen years.
And as they work through their new systems, I'm sure that they'll be able to get to
the savings for smaller amounts as well as larger ones.
Just to be clear, in this specific instance, it wasn't a trade-off between a saving
of 300K and a million. It was just completely shutting down the potential of
saving around $300,000.
Well, you don't know that because it's possible that one
vendor has been told that they couldn't prioritize their
transaction at that time. Pharmac might have had reasons for not pursuing it that
they haven't revealed to you or the person who's given you their email.
Okay, so further to that point then, can I get a commitment from yourself,
Minister, or from Pharmac that you'd be willing to look into specifically this
case to understand it as a test case of the issues that are
being faced by-
Yeah, absolutely.
If we've got all the facts, yeah.
Can I just ask, have you previously raised this as a constituency
MP or in any other capacity?
It's not in my constituency, but I understand it's been raised directly with all
three of you.
Okay. Well, if you can-
Including in direct meetings.
If you can-
And I think there's a number of factors around it.
So it would be best that we took that off.
Yeah, so I'm not going to make you any obligations right now without knowing all of
the facts and knowing exactly where that sits at this point.
Right.
Because as you say, I do know who it probably is, and we've certainly had meetings
in relatively recent times.
Exactly.
What I'd suggest is if you've had an issue like this before, again, then you
can come to us anytime. Probably easier to work out
something at this level of detail constructively rather than to raise here,
but up to you.
Again, I think I've proven with you, David, that I'm very much willing to do that
constructively.
I'll go to Aisha Vera.
Go straight with her question. Thank you.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Minister,
an opportunity to update us on how your
priorities are evolving in the year ahead.
You came to office,
and previously told the committee you wanted Pharmac to improve the funding
bids that it makes.
You gave the example of whole of society benefits for funding drugs for multiple
sclerosis, diabetes, and migraines.
Why hasn't that type of work been
visible yet?
It's a very good question, and I think it's worthy of discussion.
I would summarize that there's two basic frustrations, which I've shared in the
media. One is that in order to demonstrate that there is
a saving elsewhere,
you need to actually know what that saving is.
And what we've discovered is that while Pharmac is incredibly
fastidious about
its costs and prioritization and so on,
the rest of the healthcare system finds it difficult to
show what the costs of their services are, and therefore, what
savings might arise if the investment in a
new medicine was to displace that treatment or that procedure, and so
on. So that's the first challenge that we're facing.
The second is to do with timing. So if you take, for example,
there's been a lot of discussion about can GLP-1s
reduce obesity. It appears they can.
Can that reduce diabetes? I'm sure it can.
Can that reduce kidney failure? Can that reduce dialysis?
Well, all of those things are true,
but the timeframe for that sequence of events to happen is nearly a
decade. So for a government that is trying to justify a budget
uplift in 2026, 2027, to say that this may
have savings in 2035, for example, it doesn't
work well with the way that successive governments have budgeted.
So those are the two roadblocks that we've run into,
but we remain resolute that we can fix them.
Supplementary.
Minister, I put it to you that if you open a textbook on cost benefit
analysis, those limitations would've been in it before the
election. This was part of your party's
election commitment. Why haven't you been able to
deliver operationalizing this model in three years?
I guess because we like to try hard things.
So yep, you could've said, "This is too hard, we're just not
gonna try." But we think-
You can fix those hard things
... which is what we are doing.
I think if you were to say that we shouldn't have tried, we should've
stayed with the model that we had, remained one of the lowest funded
countries in the world for medicines, then yeah, that was an
option. It's not an option that I would accept.
Sometimes hard things are worth doing because they're difficult.
Okay. But they haven't been done yet.
Supplementary-
Yeah, and we've been quite open about that
... the ACT Party's
policy was for a medicine strategy.
I'm aware you've received briefings on a medicine strategy.
In the coming year, will a medicine strategy be delivered?
The answer is no. And can I just say that
I love talking about the ACT Party, but I know if I
do, you'll probably say that I shouldn't be talking about politics in a
strict hearing like this.
Why won't a medicine strategy be delivered when it was part of the
direction you set as minister at the beginning of your term?
Because we decided that given the range of challenges that we face, if you look at
what we've done, we've absorbed the device issue,
we've changed the culture, we've changed the management, the chair, the leadership.
We've made unending changes that have been for the benefit
of patients in New Zealand. We decided that amongst all of those,
writing another document wasn't necessary.
Two years ago here, I asked you about your stated plans for partnerships,
and you indicated that those partnerships might be partial government
funding for a drug under investigation.
Have any partnerships
been approved by Pharmac or are there any in the
works that mean that that initial direction you set will
be
acted on in the coming year?
Well,
given it takes you into the nature of contracts, I'll let the chief executive
answer if that's okay.
Could you just repeat the context?
Before your tenure at Pharmac-
Mm
... there was an indication that Pharmac would be entering into
partnerships with the private sector.
For example, a drug that was still under
investigation perhaps would be given partial funding in order
to gain access in New Zealand. Are any of those
types of partnerships
likely to be
agreed in the year ahead?
We don't have any that are at a point where they would be agreeing.
We are definitely looking at international best practice and what some other
countries are doing with those emerging
drugs and if it can come sooner. But we don't have anything that we'd
be planning to in this year that I'm aware of yet.
I'd have to go back to the team for more information. Thanks.
Minister, these are three big items about how
Pharmac does its work that it appears
you're telling the committee there's been no progress on and we can't expect more
progress in the year ahead.
A couple of things about that. Number one, I don't consider a specific
type of contracting
as a big item when you've just contracted new access to
medicines that's given 360,000 people more
access to medicine. So let's talk a little bit about the relative size here.
I wouldn't say that was big. Similarly, writing a
document or a strategy, I don't consider that big.
What is big is all of the other things that we've done-
Well, the ACT Party leader might disagree with you because it was his medicines,
his policy.
Let the minister answer.
Yeah, fair enough. But if I was to... I'd love to.
Can I be the ACT Party leader for a moment?
So if I was to channel him, I think he would say,
very, very proud of what the ACT Party has achieved through the medicines
portfolio. It's the access to medicines.
It's the change in culture. It's the work on the whole of society
methodology. All of these things are huge.
Did we get a
medicine strategy and some partnership contracts? No.
But overwhelmingly great news, and we're very happy with the way it's gone.
Carlos, primary.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair. You mentioned
the rule of two just now.
Mm.
I just want to know how many medicine have been approved today through the rule of
two pathway.
We haven't done any through the rule of two yet because that will only come into
effect next month.
Mm.
The legislation, as I'm sure you're aware,
was passed near the end of last year.
Great.
We've recently done some of the final implementation details such as
setting the fees, which will be cheaper than Australia, significantly cheaper than
Australia, to consent a medicine, which is great news.
And then as of early next month they'll be able to take
the first applications under the rule of two.
Thank you.
Jenny, primary.
Oh, thank you very much.
Thank you, Minister. Thank you for being here today.
One of the things that we heard previously was
in terms of geopolitics and the impacts that
tariffs
from America could impact on the supply of medicines and the
cost of medicines coming into New Zealand.
Has any of that played out in real time and are there any concerns that you
hold that that could still be an ongoing effect as we move into this
next financial year?
The short answer is that we've managed it very well.
It hasn't materially affected New Zealand's access to medicines.
It may be that-
One of my colleagues has more to say about it.
Yeah, we've been really lucky in that we haven't seen supply issues because
of the unrest in the Middle East. But we, and the
chief executive can speak to it, we've constantly got supply
issues. So at any one time, we've got about 100 medicines that we
might be looking at that for whatever reasons,
could be a massive uptake in need globally, it
could be that they're changing brand, it could be in manufacturing.
So there's all sorts of stuff that's constantly going on.
In my opinion, no one within government does it better than Pharmac as
far as they're constantly looking ahead as to what's happening, brand
changes, what the options are and things like that.
I think one of the concerns that certainly the chief executive and the senior
leadership team have raised with the board is
perhaps an increase in costs because of freight costs, because of
manufacturing and things like that.
So we're still getting the access that she might add too, but it is
more there could be an increase in cost that we're trying to mitigate
when we look at our out-year funding and how we do that.
Yeah. The only thing I would add is that in this budget that we've just had,
we have added $13.5 million. Now, that money,
in the first instance, can be used to absorb such costs, although if
any suppliers are watching, you didn't hear that.
However, I hope that managing those costs will allow us
to actually invest in more medicines, and
also streamlines and upgrades some of the operations so we
can process medicines faster through Pharmac.
Thank you. Just on that, in terms of this
year's budget uplift,
good to see New Zealand First national coalition agreement was to increase
the funding for Pharmac on a regular basis.
There has been a considerable amount over the last three years of finance,
more money going into purchase medicines.
You mentioned the 360,000 patients that now are receiving
medicines. What do you expect this budget
uplift, what will the impact be on patients?
And what needs to happen next, getting more medicines
off the OFI list? What is the trajectory moving forward?
Oh, gee, I didn't realize you had that commitment.
You should've helped me argue for even more money.
Yeah.
Could've been helpful. Damn it.
I did drop you a note, though.
What an opportunity lost.
Look, in terms of the $13.5 million, we hope
that that will be able to help as many as 50,000 people get additional
access in some way. But as I've said, that's contingent on
price uplifts could be potentially a problem.
And also the fact that
we've just got to work through a difficult year for the whole world before we
can be sure about that impact.
And to give you an indication in, I think, as to how well
Pharmac do, as the minister identified in his opening remarks.
In the last financial year with no uplift in funding,
effectively we had 36 either widening or new medicines
come on board affecting that many people.
So a big part of, which is interesting even with the medical devices
questions that we were getting straight off.
All we want to do is procure and
renegotiate to try and bring down prices so that we can
then invest that in other medicines.
So what we can potentially do with that 13 and a half is
hopefully it's 50,000. But equally, we can prove what we can
do just by renegotiating, making savings, bundling
things better,
getting better at our processes as to how we recover, that we then reinvest that
obviously into what's as high as we can on the
OFI. But our challenge going forward, which I know you
identify as emerging technologies and emerging medicines,
and when you think about gene therapy and people's
expectations of what they should be able to get, and they should.
It's kind of mind-boggling that in this day and age, we can
give the kind of treatments that don't actually make people sicker to
then try and get better.
Literally, as we can see with the Malaghan Institute and CAR T therapy and things
like that. But man, are they expensive.
Really expensive. So as a country, and that's
the challenges as we move forward, as to how you can
afford these amazing new medicines, technology,
GLPs. They're fantastic. They're very
expensive
in that context.
Thank you.
Dr. Ardern.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. These questions are all related to the theme of medicines.
Pharmac ran a consultation on removing items-
You decide politics and decisions.
Pharmac ran a consultation on removing items from the Options for Investment
list.
Will that work continue in the year under discussion?
And if not, why not?
I'll refer that to the chief executive.
I try not to get involved in their specific decisions.
Thank you for the question. Yes, we had quite a lot of feedback from
our patient family working group that we have as part of the reset,
as well as other consumer groups over time and
suppliers, that they felt they would like more
certainty with knowing things that are lower
ranked on the OFI or potentially wouldn't be ranked.
And so we went out to consultation publicly on that question.
Should we remove some of the lower-ranked medicines on the OFI that
have a smaller chance of being funded with the knowledge that you could come back
and reapply or re-request? And we heard
resoundingly, "No, actually. We
think we
don't really want that. We want to leave things on the list," and
the hope that they would be funded and that they would remain eligible for funding.
And that's what we've done. So we don't have any intention to change that.
It was really interesting because we thought people were saying we'd rather know
and have the certainty, as Natalie said.
But actually, once you went out there and consulted, and I met with a few of them,
and they'd go, "Well, actually, that medicine's now so old, and it's been
superseded by a far more modern one, and so why don't we take off the old one and
then we'll re..." And then he said, it was a specialist, and he said, "And then I
thought about it, and I thought, well, I'd rather keep that one and have something
that's a maybe or a hope than nothing."
We did it for the right intentions, but then we listened to the
consultation.
So you've
heard that people would rather
have a hope of having the item funded, even though we know from the
statistics items can spend an awful long time on the options for
investment list.
Some have, yeah. Very long time.
Seven years is the average, right?
And that's because some are extraordinary and
as I think the chief executive was being careful, but
the likelihood is quite slim for
some.
That's true, but also I'd just point, the number that have come off and been
funded in the last few years is greater than at any time
in a decade, two decades. We've had an enormous
amount of cash put into Pharmac, and therefore new medicines
being funded. So perhaps we live in more hopeful times than previously.
And Mr. Chair, also keeping with the theme of access to medicines, I know of
the government's recent points about medical lockers.
What work is occurring within government to make sure that
the implementation of medical lockers,
where drugs can be picked up by a person from a locker
if they can't make it to the pharmacy during hours, that the implementation of
that is safe and people get the appropriate advice about their
medicine when they picked it up?
Ultimately, that's going to be a professional judgment.
So if you are a pharmacist, you have a whole lot of professional
obligations in terms of what's the ultimate outcome of people
receiving medicines that you dispense.
So you would expect that we can actually trust professionals.
I don't believe that
people that spend their whole life and are passionate about their profession should
be cocooned in rules that just make life harder for no reason.
I choose to trust professionals.
See if that applies to all government policy.
Supplementary. Indeed, so do I.
Even the comedians-
So-
... and the little ones
... is there any discussion with
those professionals about how to make this change workable for
them with those safety rules in mind?
Well, it's pharmacists that are asking for it.
That's the first thing. Second of all, the way that it will be
implemented will be through a change to the Medicines Act, which is currently being
worked on by Casey Costello. So you can imagine all of the usual
lawmaking procedures that go on. There will be
consultation on the bill. It will go off to a select committee.
I'm sure that if anybody can see a gaping hole or
problem with it, then those lawmaking procedures that New Zealanders rely
on will come to their aid.
Charles, primary.
Thank you, Minister. I just want to talk about your last week announcement, talking
about pharmacists going to be responsible for the funding for
ambulance medicine used by the ambulance.
Can you give us a little bit more insight in how this will affect the
budget for budget 2026?
Yeah.
Obviously there's a cost to that, but at the same time,
there are other agencies that were previously paying, so that will now be funded
through Pharmac, and I think it makes sense to have the
organization that is just really good at
assessing and buying medicines doing that for the
ambulance service.
Yeah. So that's one thing I don't get from your announcement is you believe that
the medicine will be cheaper because they changed the funding model from Health
New Zealand and ACC to Pharmac. So how
does that work?
Well, we're just better.
Yeah, a little bit.
But no, in all seriousness, Pharmac buys $1.8
billion worth of medicine every year.
So when someone comes along and says, "We buy $1.8 billion," you tend
to get a better deal than if you're St.
John or whoever, much respect as we have for them.
And they were sort of buying across the board, and it was not
as keen, and we just saw that we had the expertise that we could bring in.
There is some cost to Pharmac, but in the scheme of it,
fairly minimal when it comes to the advantages that we can give to
make sure. And it's the small stocks that they need, as you can imagine,
within ambulances working with the hospitals because when they do need to
restock sometimes that's where it is. So we can streamline that for it.
It actually makes it cheaper for our ambulance services.
But equally, and we've also widened the access that they're able to give a
medicine within the ambulance that they couldn't before.
So I think that stuff all makes a difference.
And as a board and giving some direction, we're
quite excited about other areas. There are other areas where they
hold medicines and how they access them and at what cost.
Actually, there's medical outlets in some of our corrections facilities, for
example. It's sort of looking across the board as to how we
might be able to, looking at some of our doctors' surgeries, particularly in rural
areas, as to what they might actually keep
on site in smaller quantities if
that's going to help access for people, which is the whole aim of
it at the end of the day.
Thank you. We're on time.
Is that it?
I've got two more questions for you if you have them.
Yeah. Yeah.
Sweet.
Go for it.
Lucky last.
So yeah.
Last two-
Yeah
... just very briefly.
You get one. You get one.
Appreciate the commitment to working constructively to try and
resolve these issues that have been raised-
Yeah, just notice now
... and of course these have been raised in the past.
But nonetheless, just two quick questions.
The first is, are you aware, and this is perhaps better directed to Pharmac, how
many people currently work within Pharmac on medical device procurement?
I'd have to come back with the exact number.
Okay. My understanding is about 16.
Does that sound about-
That sounds close.
Okay. The second, and this is potentially for the minister and/or...
Well, is really for the minister. Just to your point earlier, Minister Seymour,
about brokering the peace between Te Whatu Ora, Health New Zealand, and
Pharmac. You'll probably be aware that in 2022 there was a review
which came to the conclusion that, actually,
the procurement processes for medical devices
perhaps best sat within Health New Zealand.
Why do you disagree with that position?
Because there's different types of devices.
So there are some that are very adjacent to the
clinician, and if it's something that they need to buy in large
volume,
where basically they're going to be a huge number of, I don't know,
gloves or perhaps a bed or a device that
clinicians use, then the people that employ the clinicians should be involved in
that, and the people that are closest to using them.
On the other hand, there are other types of devices where the costs and
benefits are open to scrutiny, and the
organization that has the best ability to evaluate costs and
benefits is Pharmac. And so as a result,
we now have, I think if memory serves, about 56 different categories
of medical devices. Roughly half of those now sit with Health New Zealand.
Roughly half now sit with Pharmac.
And they've been allocated according to whether they
are more of a bulk volume, close to clinician Health New Zealand
thing, or more of a technical, complex benefit,
require tough cost benefit analysis, and therefore more of a Pharmac thing.
All right. Thank you, Minister. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Oh, good. Well,
there.
Welcome, Minister Costello,
Chief Executive Dale Bramley,
Stella Hart, everybody else involved. Very good to have you here.
We have you here for 30 minutes, Minister, so there's time for some
brief introductory remarks, and then we'll hand it over to questions from members.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the committee.
I would like to touch on just a couple of points around the Budget 2026
portfolio areas that I hold. In my emergency services
responsibilities, 35 million over four years has been invested to strengthen
road ambulance services. This investment is to deliver immediate improvements
for patients and frontline staff in meeting growing demand.
It supports two ambulance hubs to be established in Auckland, with one confirmed in
South Auckland. It also supports an electronic patient clinical
record system, additional training support for ambulance communication center
staff, and additional clinical welfare checks for patients.
This budget investment is in addition to a funding increase from Health New
Zealand and ACC, which is being negotiated for road ambulances
to meet demand and cost pressures.
It also sits alongside investments in stronger air ambulance services.
Seven helicopters are already in service, and nine are scheduled to enter into
service between now and mid-2027.
I want to turn now to maternal health.
Budget 2026 provides 34.4 million over four
years to support mothers and babies in their critical first
days after birth. We're investing in the resourcing
needed to enable mothers to choose to receive up to three days of
inpatient postnatal care after giving birth.
This supports our government's focus on giving babies the best possible start in
life and providing mothers with choice over how
and where they receive support after giving birth.
This funding will increase inpatient postnatal care bed capacity and the
workforce and support implementation of the Three Day
Postnatal Stay Amendment Bill, which Minister Brown is
responsible for.
Finally, in regard to aged care, you'll be aware that the last year the
government established an independent aged care ministerial advisory group to
provide expert advice on long-term reform of the aged care system.
We're expecting the group's report in the coming weeks, which will help inform
future decisions. In the interim, the government continues to make
investments to sustain services and ensure older people can access
timely care. The latest 4.C in funding uplift
announced this morning will provide the aged residential care
sector with an extra $79 million this year.
Thank you, and happy to take questions.
Thank you, Minister. Dr. Barrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Minister.
Can you explain your claim that the St John's Ambulance now
receives 90% of its operational funding
from the government?
So, the funding received is a mix of
ACC and health funding,
plus the co-payment. So where I've been quoted in that is including the
co-payment portion of that, so in terms of the funding that they
receive. So that is differentiating what is there.
Is it correct that St John's receives 90% of its operational
funding from government sources?
So I'm not sure what specifically you're quoting.
The references that I have made around funding is to do with the funding they
receive from ACC, from Health New Zealand, and the co-payment.
And is it your view that that adds up to 90%?
I'd have to check the figures. I'm not sure if anyone can provide me the exact
numbers around
...
I don't probably have them with me, but we could find them.
Yeah, we could get the specific numbers.
Yeah, it's 93% government funding plus part charges.
Yeah. Plus- 93%.
Plus part charges. So how much is government funding without the part charges?
I'm sorry, I'd have to go back. In terms of percentage of their cost, and this is
where it's difficult to work through that funding
ratio because it is reliant on what
the ambulance services themselves have as operating costs.
So it does vary.
So based on this information from officials, and New Zealanders know that the cost
of an ambulance has gone up from approximately $100
to $135 under this government,
is it correct that the government is providing 90%
of St John's funding?
What I can talk specifically to what we fund
in terms of the amount, but the percentage of their operating costs, I'd have to
come back and clarify that.
Why were you certain when you spoke to Radio New Zealand that well over
90% of
St John's funding was provided by government on the 22nd of May?
I
can't refer to the specific quote.
What the information I was relying on-
It's from you
... was as ... Yeah, I don't know the
interview, so I'd have to go back and refer to the specifics of that comment.
But what I was referring to was the official advice that says
93% is now covered
by co-payments and the contribution from ACC and Health New Zealand.
Before this budget, St John's indicated to me they would need an extra
145 million per year in order to
be 90% funded by
government. How can the
8.75 million per year in this
budget possibly bridge that gap?
I'm sorry that you're quoting the St
John's commentary. What I am saying is what the official advice has
been around what their costs are and what we have been
funding. So,
their current contract negotiations are in play,
and then the additional funding was separate to their contract.
Is it the government's position that St John's should
receive 90% of its funding from the
government?
No, that's not the government's position.
That's what the status was, that
93% from ACC, Health New Zealand, and
co-payment
from their operating cost was the figures that we were confirmed was
being provided.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. What do you think
the funding level from government for St John's should be?
I think that we should fund as far as possible within the government
constraints. But that is part of negotiation.
I'm not going to state a government position.
That is,
we want to ensure that the services are provided and that they
are delivering quality of service, and this is what we're investing in
technology, into staffing, into training.
Have you asked the New Zealand First
party what their position is on this issue?
Well, we have a coalition agreement commitment around funding for New Zealand
for ambulance services.
And do you believe it's been met?
I believe we have increased the funding for ambulance services as per
our coalition agreement.
Linda Palmer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and kia ora, Minister.
I wanted to explore with you around vaping and the
growth of vaping in our population,
and how from a cessation perspective,
the infrastructure that we have is built around quit smoking,
and hearing from community around how to
access vape to quit services are
limited.
Wanting to understand what is the process in terms of how we
can speed up access for those who
you smoke, you access the vape support to
quit.
Then it is an issue now where there are
people just going straight to vapes, and so there isn't NRT
necessarily approved for
the quit to vape services. Is there any development going
on right now in terms of the way that we can improve access,
understanding that Pharmac hasn't met with Medsafe yet-
Yeah
... to be able to fund the NRT for quit to vapes?
Yeah. The access of other products.
So I think the important part is that this is about
the nicotine addiction component.
So yes, Health New Zealand is definitely open to working through programs to
support
the quit vape activity, and I met with
all of the quit smoking providers over the last two or three weeks to talk about
those initiatives. We are still focused on getting those
smokers to stop. It has been encouraging when we look at
the data, particularly from ASH, and in terms of the vape sales that are
occurring, that vaping is reducing.
That has been encouraging. I think the data we have around
The estimated sales for vapes in 2024 was
280 million. In 2022, it was 404 million.
So we have seen a reduction in vape sales, and ASH's survey is also
recognizing that vaping numbers have been decreasing over the last three
years. But yes, it is an important conversation that we're
providing supports. Some of the quit smoking providers are already doing
that and providing some support in that space.
But having a dedicated program will be the next
phase of the-
Yeah, there was the Vape to Quit
initiative that was launched last year, and it was
specifically for face-to-face support, which is awesome.
There are more and more whanau that would seek to access
Vape to Quit support online or digitally.
Is there any provision to support other providers like the
tried and proven Quitline to come on board with that service?
Yeah, I think the caution retail in that is that we want to ensure that they
are engaged with a quit smoking support.
How that support is provided, I think there is some flexibility around how we can
do that without having to have face-to-face
meetings. But we did want to make sure that
it is part of a quit smoking program, that we're not just
supplying vapes. So, I think the way those services are delivered,
and that was part of meeting with the quit smoking providers, was to talk through
how can we expand that capacity and capability.
It has been really successful in terms of the high number
of quits from those that are
CO verified quits in that space through that program.
So I think
expanding that may be useful. But again, we want to make sure they are actually
engaged with services to ensure that they are being
CO verified, and that that isn't just a way of
getting
dual access to the system. So I think there is some work we can do in that space.
Just to build on that, thinking of a particular population that is vulnerable
and has high smoking but also vaping uptake.
Tangata Whaiora have spoken about how
can there be some focus around support into the mental health
community for bespoke services to support
them to vape.
Yeah.
So we've gone from tobacco. It's now the issue around vapes, how to
support these vulnerable populations for quit.
Absolutely, and I think that's part of
targeting those that we know are high
smoking users. There have been some successful engagements with
correction services, so ensuring that we're
capturing people
as they're leaving the corrections environment to be supported
to continue to not smoke. But I think all of those initiatives,
in some areas it's kind of being a little bit more bold about
what level of support we can provide.
But that was definitely part of the conversations around accessing those that have
the highest need.
And this
will be a final question on this line to allow for other supps.
It's my understanding that services who operate in the
quit smoking realm, if they don't carry the
vapes prescribed or some service contracts, that they will no longer be
delivering smoking cessation services.
Yeah, so that is part of the package or the suite of options, because
if we are saying that these are the tools and
options available for a quit smoking service, then all of our quit smoking services
need to be providing those options.
And so we could, in essence, see some
long-standing smoking cessation providers lose
contracts and loss of that institutional knowledge.
Yeah, and this is the process that we are dealing
with, a changing environment in terms of those smoking needs.
So we need to ensure that our providers are delivering the services,
and all of this is performance managed around how many quits they are
achieving, what is the engagement they're having, what is the
success of the program. So I think it's reasonable to have a performance
monitoring process within those provider relationships.
Do you think it makes the provider and the-
I have a motion to Marsha Vero here. Thank you.
Thanks, Mr.
Chair.
What evidence does this vape
kits program have that the quits
are in addition to the
number of people quitting
that was being achieved before the vape kits were added?
I'd have to get specific data, but I think the numbers that we had around the
Vape to Quit program was, just checking the numbers.
So during the January to July 2025 pilot,
participating providers supplied kits to
2,150 clients.
79% of the clients who received a vape kit achieved a CO validated
quit, accounting for 37% of all the
CO validated quits
recorded by participating providers during that period.
So it equated to about 37% of the total quits.
Yeah. Thank you. I'm aware you have a very
well-qualified public health physician sitting on your left, and
I wonder if he might want to take a go at my question, which is about quits in
addition to the
people who were quitting before the vaping was introduced to this program.
So the standard
rate once you're referred to stop smoking
services, validation after a period is around 60% to
70%. So for those who got offered the vaping kit,
the rate of quitting and validating of that is actually slightly
higher to the 70% to 80% range.
Thank you. And when will this evaluation be
published?
I don't have that information.
I have the-
We're currently just working in partnership with the Ministry to establish a
regulatory
process.
Well, it'll be good to see that happen.
Carlos.
So
just talking about helping people to quit smoking, do you think that it will be
great if we can put on some kind of a disclaimer or some of
the pictures or health issues pictures on the packaging of
vaping product will help people to quit vaping?
Sorry, what sort of pictures would you be imagining?
Like on a cigarette package, they've always got some kind of a health disclaimer
there saying, "Smoking will cause cancer," and then they have
some kind of graphics to tell people what will the lungs look like.
Do you think it would be a good same approach on vape product as well,
to put that kind of pictures on those vaping product?
So the picture would have to relate to what harm
vaping is causing.
Correct, like popcorn lung and all this other stuff.
So at this stage, there isn't the evidence to demonstrate what that
harm looks like, and I think to clarify, at no point has
anybody said vaping is good for you.
But what we are focused on is ensuring that vaping is made available to those
who smoke to enable them to quit smoking on a least harmful
product basis.
So-
So the deterrent away from vaping is a
separate scenario.
Well, I mean, there's an argument whether vaping cause
health problem or not, but I think would we think it would be good if we just put
another extra sentence there that vaping may cause some kind of
health issues to remind people there is a risk?
The very clear message we have repeated and consistently repeat, that is
if you don't smoke, don't vape.
Yes.
If you smoke, vaping may assist you.
The confusion around the messaging around vaping harm
has resulted in people now taking up smoking in
order to quit vaping, and that is the confused message suggesting that
there is significant harm from vaping,
when we know smoking is the product that is
causing people to die. And so therefore, that
is the messaging we want to do and overcomplication the messaging around vaping.
In future states, once we have our smoke-free generation,
there may be consideration in that space, but it's not something we're looking at,
at the moment.
Supple-
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My supplementary is for the Director General.
What is the Ministry's view of the emerging evidence of vaping
harms that have come through in the last two years?
So the Ministry's view would be there is emerging evidence,
but that the emerging evidence still supports the fact that smokers should
switch to vaping.
And which harms are you referring to in the emerging evidence?
So there is emerging evidence around damage to lungs,
and-
Cancer?
And emerging, but
the evidence still supports that smoking is worse for you.
And
is
it totally proven that
nicotine-containing vapes are addictive?
Nicotine is an addictive substance.
Riana.
I just wanted to touch on some of what's already been
discussed, but we know, and there's been statements made of over
200,000 people have quit
each year sort of thing. Do we have specific numbers
of those that are attributed to vaping,
in terms of data that might come out of either the Ministry or Te Whatu Ora?
The only data we have in terms of the graphics, which I have shared quite
extensively, is around that we saw the smoking rates
declining up until 2018 at a relatively slow rate.
And then between 2018 and 2023, we saw a massive decline,
and that the only difference in that space was that vaping became
available. So we did see, and it has been public health policy
since 2018 that vaping
is a product that has been used to help people quit smoking.
Just wanting to ask about workforce in terms of our enforcement officers.
Has there been an increase in the workforce across the motu in terms
of what we're doing to ensure that our vendors are adhering
to law and legislation?
Yeah, really encouraging. There has been an increase over the two years.
So since the beginning of 2024, we've
grown the team. So we are at full strength in the compliance space.
But importantly, there has been really good reporting around
significant increase, and I can get those details to you around the
infringement and enforcement activity that has happened.
And also the compliance,
assessing the compliance for most retailers has been quite high.
I think from memory it was in that 90% range of most of the
retailers are compliant.
But that is again, the work that we've done to
set up using the compliance team as well as customs and police
to actually target the illicit tobacco market as also part of
that program of work.
All right. I'm going to one more sub from Carlos-
Thank you, Minister
... then I'll go to Janice primary.
I remember last year when we are sitting here talking about vape, and we just
recently passed the legislation, and you mentioned that it was only the first stage
to target vaping. So how does it look like on the second stage, or
what is the area we got to target on the second stage?
So I think there's a range of things that we've got to target in that space as the
total environment at the moment. We have probably
more regulatory controls on vapes than we do over tobacco.
So there is some work in that space.
The other component is actually having a regulatory regime that is
consistent.
Sir.
So there is a lot of work we can do in that space.
So I am bringing a cabinet paper forward in the
coming weeks-
Yeah
... to look at that other stage of the regulatory regime.
So very briefly if I can, Mr. Chair.
Go on.
Minister, can you confirm that what you're signaling there is a direction to
liberalize vapes?
No, absolutely not. What I'm signaling there is the ability to have some
consistency around the level of control.
We have greater visibility over the retail of vapes than we do over tobacco, and I
think we should-
So you're going to increase level of... Which one is it?
Increase the level of control over tobacco or reduce?
Yes, over tobacco.
Okay. Primary, Jenny Marcroft.
Thank you very much. Switching topics now, Minister.
Looking at aged care and the announcement
today of, I think, $79 million.
Can you let the committee know how
investment into aged care will free up hospital
beds, and what will this mean for those patients
that get stuck on a Friday and can't get returned to residential care?
Yeah. So part of the contract, on top of a contract uplift, is actually to
do some of that funding towards the
resourcing to allow aged care to be funded to have weekend
admissions,
Friday nights, over the weekend, because there is a different type of personnel
that is needed. So listening to the sector and through their contract
negotiations, that has been part of the consideration around
ensuring that
there is workforce investment, capacity investment from that
space. And it is just one portion. As
you're aware,
we're imminently going to receive the Ministerial Advisory Group
report onto aged care in terms of system reform, but that
is the first part of that. So,
the contract negotiation has been really
positively engaged, and I think that we've come with a good outcome around that
investment and how it can support delivery of services.
Now, you mentioned your Ministerial Advisory Group report, which is due out
shortly.
Can you give the committee any indication of what might be in that
report? Is there anything high level that you can-
I've been really clear to ensure that the Ministerial Advisory Group
is independent of government, so we're not directed.
The terms of reference were very
detailed around the sustainability of the system, the investment,
and protecting the supply of
standard beds. So those are the components in
it.
We should have the report
next month.
And we will continue to engage to ensure that that
is publicly available and work through making
some
ministerial decisions, taking a Cabinet paper to Cabinet
in this term of government around some key policy decisions.
Thank you. And just final supplementary on this.
Obviously, this committee was involved in
a
serious piece of work around our inquiry into aged care,
and particularly with a focus on dementia and neurocognitive
disorders.
Has that report been useful for you as a
minister in this area and also too
for the Ministerial Advisory Group?
Yeah. I would say it was
very useful, and the key recommendations were very consistent with the
initial discussions with the group around what is
needing to be addressed, what should be prioritized.
So, it was definitely one of the foundation sort of documents that we
provided for them for their
reading bag, along with the aged care funding model review,
which was also part of those considerations.
So, it was a very useful report, and it has been part of
their considerations.
Thank you.
Hard working committee. Sup.
Thank you. I've got a couple of sups in lieu of my primary.
Minister, the aged care sector says there's no more beds today
than what there was before the budget.
Mm-hmm.
And they're 95% full with an estimated
12,000 beds still needed. So what
from Budget '26, if anything,
goes towards new capacity? So is there any new capacity,
or is this just funding existing beds-
Yeah. I-
... to make these decisions?
Yeah, the reality is, it is about sustaining the existing beds.
We know that we've had closures.
We still have
a lot of work to do in that space, and we recognize that's why the
importance of the aged care group there is.
But I think there's also opportunities we have around investing in
the
access to in-home care,
primary care support.
So all of those components will be part of ensuring that we have a
sustainable system moving forward.
But no, the big focus at the moment and the investment from both
last year and this year, so I think about 149 million in total
over last budget and this budget,
is to sustain the existing capacity.
Encouragingly, it's
talking to the providers,
shifting environment. So workforce isn't the primary
issue now. It is maintaining the
facilities and the capacity.
So there is real opportunities, but encouragingly, the
providers that are dealing with investment in
technology and systems is also-- There is really good.
But we
recognize that the level of uplift needed to grow
capacity is going to be significant.
Which raises two very quick questions then.
So what from Budget 2026 was dedicated
towards that home
care service? And,
in relation to the announcement this morning, do
you have any idea of how many providers are actually currently able to take
weekend
admissions?
I don't have the specific data, but I know that the officials
have been working directly with the
peak body, the Aged Care Association, around that capacity and who that-
Impacts. In terms of the in-home care, that
contract is still under negotiation.
That will be announced in due course once that contract negotiation is
resolved.
Because
without any specific ring-fence money for aged care
workers retention pay and training and all that sort of stuff, and you say
that workforce isn't necessarily the main factor at the moment, but
looking at the data that we have available, it doesn't feel like there's many
providers that will be in a position to be able to actually take those
weekend admissions without extra capacity.
Yeah. I-
Does that worry you?
The
conversations that I've had both with the
peak body and the providers that I've met with, there is capacity to
deal with it. That is why this funding has been important
to them. But I'd have to come back to you with specific data around those numbers.
All right. Yeah.
No, I'm good.
The chair.
I had one question for this.
Go for it.
Supplementary based on aged care.
Alzheimer's New Zealand
says that Budget 2026 fails to meet the growing dementia challenge,
and that Dementia Mati Ware Ware Action Plan remains unfunded and
unimplemented.
Is there anything specific that you'd like to say to what is a
really growing concern amongst New Zealanders, not just
Alzheimer's New Zealand, that we do more
towards something that is
only going to become a bigger concern?
When is the government going to-
Yeah. So as you're aware-
... come up with some funding for that?
... there's I think seven programs running at the moment, the trials that are being
run, so they will be reported back around that.
There is generally,
I think, opportunity within the ministerial advisory group to deal with
some of those growing capacity around dementia facilities-
Well, and the group is reporting back in a couple of weeks.
Are you expecting that we'll be part of that?
Yeah, so
it is part of that overall capability, and I think there is
real opportunities within that space to have earlier intervention, which I think is
one of the key actions there, seeking early diagnosis and early
intervention. So I think the aged care system is a
continuum of care across primary
in-home care,
other community supports.
And I think collectively we've got an opportunity to actually
deliver a lot of those things, which is early diagnosis I think is a
critical component.
And the carer strategy also, the work that Mr.
Simmons' doing around supporting carers in that space as well.
So I think there's three or four programs of work that kind of link
into improving the outcomes, and we will
continue to engage. But specific actions, I
would really want to have the ministerial advisory group come forward.
But we are looking at the capacity around
the
total capacity around
psychogeriatric and
dementia care facilities as part of that capacity growing that we need within the
space.
Thank you.
We're out of time.
Thank you very much.
Appreciate everyone's efforts today.
Thank you.
Thank you. Committee, we are suspended till 3:00.
Great.
That's it. Thank you.
Huh?
At 3:00.
Yeah, 3:00.
Just want to say, we've got-